# Structural bioinformatics to understand effector function within the _Magnaporthe oryzae_ rice pathosystem
Angus H Bucknell (1), Bright Hodasi (1), Lauren S Ryder (1), Vincent Were (1), Xia Yan (1), Adam R Bentham (2), and Nicholas J. Talbot (1). (1) The Sainsbury Laboratory, Noriwch Research Park
(2) Centre for Programmable Biological Matter, Durham University

Artificial intelligence (AI)-based protein design tools have great potential to advance our understanding of molecular interactions between pathogenic fungi and their hosts. This study illustrates how AI-designed binders can be deployed to characterise enigmatic fungal effectors and reveal conserved virulence mechanisms, complementing traditional molecular approaches. The blast fungus _Magnaporthe oryzae_ infects agronomically significant crops such as rice and wheat, but also subsistence crops such as fingermillet. Globally, rice blast disease has an economic impact of $66 billion each year. Like many phytopathogens, M. oryzae utilises an arsenal of secreted effectors to facilitate plant infection. Through a structure-based phylogenetic analysis of the M. oryzae effector repertoire, we have discovered a previously uncharacterised effector, Magnaporthe effector protein 26 (Mep26). Structural predictions suggest that Mep26 functions as an enzymatic effector with phytate-degrading activity. Furthermore, we have identified three structural orthologues of Mep26 that exhibit low sequence similarity yet share a conserved structural fold. To probe the function of Mep26, we utilised AI-based protein design to generate de novo protein binders for Mep26. Designed binders were filtered in silico for cross-reactivity across structural orthologues to dissect the mechanism by which the Mep26 effector family contributes to fungal virulence. By targeting the binders to the putative active site, we hope to disrupt ligand binding and consequentially phytate degradation. Enzymatic assays can then to be used to test whether activity is reduced in the presence of the binders. Furthermore, by customising the binders with various tags, such as localisation signals or degradation motifs, we aim to assess whether we can phenocopy mutants lacking all members of the Mep26 family. This proof-of-concept study of the Mep26 family will allow for these techniques to be applied to other challenging research areas, such as targeting highly redundant structural families in genetically intractable organisms where multiple knockouts could prove more difficult. Finally, we provide an overview of AI-driven protein design and outline how de novo protein design strategies can be broadly applied in other areas of fungal protein-protein interaction research. Through this work, we aim to stimulate discussion on how emerging technologies can address fundamental questions in fungal biology.
